FR #1094: Add Dataset Completeness attribute for custom columns (#1800)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/attributes/column_handling.md

Reviewer: As long as you are touching this markdown... it feels like the preamble needs revision.

I just realized that I'm applying this attribute to the `Contract Commitment` dataset, and PR #1900 proposes adding it to `Invoice Detail` dataset.

Are you open to "genericizing" this attribute description in this PR to make it globally applicable to all datasets?  You would be within your rights to push back and keep it out of scope.  But either way, it seems like something we need to tackle.

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Genericized the preamble. Removed dataset-specific examples ("commitment discount tracking") so the attribute applies cleanly to Cost & Usage, Contract Commitment, Invoice Detail, and future datasets. The Example section provides concrete illustrations without limiting the attribute scope.

Author: I'm fine to doing that here. Fwiw, I did try a few options, but they all felt a little off. Looking at it holistically, I'm not sure it's critical, so I just decided to remove it. If anyone feels strongly about saying something more generic, I'm fine to re-add something. Let me know.

Reviewer: @flanakin 
I'm not seeing any change applied to the intro section of this file.  (Which file are you talking about?)  This whole section remains unaltered:

> A [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) consists of a set of columns that convey information about the charges incurred with a service provider. Each column describes an aspect of the charge, including but not limited to:
> 
> * Who is responsible for incurring or delivering the service.
> * What the charge is for.
> * When the charge was incurred.
> * Where the service was delivered.
> * Why the charge was incurred for a specific price.
> * How much the charge is and how that cost is calculated.

Any use of "charge" is problematic if this is a dataset-agnostic attribute.  The definition of `charge` in the glossary is:

> A row in a FOCUS-compatible cost and usage dataset.

For example, the Contract Commitment dataset says nothing about something like "where the service was delivered".

Could you please revise this section to be dataset-agnostic?

Author: Doh! I think I mixed up comments. I thought this was about Dataset Completeness. I see this is about Column Handling. Let me take a look...

Reviewer: Thank you.  If you think it's out of scope, I get it -- but would be nice to address as long as we're here.

Author: I updated the Column Handling preamble to be more generic. This makes more sense why you were calling this out as an expansion of the scope, but I think it makes sense. Thanks for catching it!

Closing this to prep for the member review, but don't hesitate to reopen or create a new thread.

* Who is responsible for or associated with the activity.
* What the record represents.
* When the activity occurred.
* Where the activity took place.
* Why the record exists or has specific values.
* How values are calculated or determined.

While FOCUS establishes the core structure and standardizes columns for consistent reporting, the diverse and evolving landscape of service providers and service offerings may require [*data generators*](#metadata.datagenerator) to include custom columns in a *FOCUS dataset*. These additional columns enable deeper analysis and provide more detailed information that may not be fully captured by standard FOCUS columns. See the [Dataset Completeness](#attributes.datasetcompleteness) attribute for requirements on what custom columns to include.

Columns within FOCUS include an ID and a display name. Column IDs are used in files and database tables and display names can be used in report output and other descriptive content, like documentation. Column IDs provided in a *FOCUS dataset* follow consistent naming and documentation conventions for FinOps practitioners who consume the data for analysis, reporting, and other use cases.

> All columns defined in the FOCUS specification MUST follow the naming and documentation requirements listed below.

Reviewer: ### A Logical Contradiction in the `column_handling.md` Intro
* **The Issue:** In the intro to `column_handling.md`, you changed the text to read: `All columns defined in the FOCUS specification MUST follow the naming and documentation requirements listed below.` 
However, the requirements right below that govern **Custom Columns**. By definition, custom columns are *not* defined in the FOCUS specification—they are defined by the provider! So that intro sentence technically exempts custom columns from the very rules you just wrote for them.
* **The Fix:** Change it to apply to the dataset, not the specification: `All columns included in a *FOCUS dataset* MUST follow the naming and documentation requirements listed below.`

Also, we don't have normative requirements in intro sections like this -- use a lowercase must.  

@ijurica Are you tracking this rewrite, and have you incorporated it into #1981?  Or will you have to rewrite that work there once this gets approved?

```suggestion
All columns included in a *FOCUS dataset* must follow the naming and documentation requirements listed below.
```

Reviewer 2: Since the guidelines and the related attribute refactoring (including ColumnHandling) are not yet approved, I didn’t plan to enforce the reformatting/rephrasing in this PR.

For reference, here’s a preview of what we’re proposing in #1981:

*Note: What belongs in Column Handling vs. Dataset Completeness is a separate topic.*

> Dataset conforming to ColumnHandling attribute MUST adhere to the following requirements:
> 
> * FOCUS dataset MUST adhere to the following column ordering requirements:
>   * FOCUS dataset SHOULD list all FOCUS columns before all Custom columns.
>   * FOCUS dataset SHOULD sort FOCUS columns alphabetically by their Column ID within the FOCUS columns group.
>   * FOCUS dataset SHOULD sort Custom columns alphabetically by their Column ID within the Custom columns group.
>   * FOCUS dataset SHOULD NOT intermix FOCUS columns and Custom columns when ordering columns.
> 
> Column conforming to ColumnHandling attribute MUST adhere to the following requirements:
> 
> * FOCUS column MUST adhere to the following requirements:
>   * FOCUS column MUST use a Display Name consistent with the Column ID, with spaces inserted between words (e.g., Column ID "BillingAccountName" and Display Name "Billing Account Name").
>   * FOCUS column MUST use Pascal case in the Column ID.
>   * FOCUS column MUST use only alphanumeric characters in the Column ID.
>   * FOCUS column MUST NOT include special characters in the Column ID.
>   * FOCUS column MUST NOT use abbreviations other than `Id` in the Column ID.
>   * ...
> * Custom column (e.g., service-provider-defined column included in FOCUS dataset) MUST adhere to the following requirements:
>   * Custom column MUST include the `x_` prefix in the Column ID to identify it as an external custom column and to distinguish it from FOCUS columns to avoid conflicts in future releases.
>   * Custom column SHOULD use Pascal case in the Column ID.
>   * Custom column SHOULD use only alphanumeric characters in the Column ID.
>   * Custom column SHOULD NOT include special characters in the Column ID.
>   * ...

Reviewer: @ijurica Thank you for that, but -- this line we're talking about is in the informative intro for the attribute, not the normative section.

Reviewer: Looks like your solution in #1981 is to strike this line completely... Which does work for me, but would want to make sure that works for @flanakin here.

Reviewer 2: Excerpt from the PR #1981 description for reference:

> ...
> ### What Changed and Why
> ...
> #### FOCUS vs Custom column requirements explicitly separated (non-material change)
> 
> Where the original specification indicated that custom columns SHOULD follow the same requirements as FOCUS columns, all applicable FOCUS column requirements have been explicitly restated for Custom columns and downgraded to SHOULD.
> 
> Exceptions apply where the original specification used MUST for custom columns or where SHOULD would not be meaningful - in those cases, MUST has been retained.
> 
> This reflects the distinction already present in the Guidelines and makes the applicability of each requirement unambiguous.

Reviewer: @ijurica Maybe we should hop on a call to discuss.  This line is _not_ a change to a normative requirement.  It is a change to the Overview section.

* _This_ PR **changes** the line.
* _Your_ PR **deletes** the line.

Which of those changes do you prefer?

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Changed to lowercase "must" to fix the logical contradiction. Line 16 now reads:

> All columns included in a *FOCUS dataset* must follow the naming and documentation requirements listed below.

This is an informative intro statement, not a normative requirement, so lowercase is correct.

* <a name="column_handling:custom-column"></a>Custom (e.g., service-provider-defined) columns that are not defined by FOCUS but included in a *FOCUS dataset* MUST follow the following rules:
  * Custom columns MUST be prefixed with a consistent `x_` prefix to identify them as external, custom columns and distinguish them from FOCUS columns to avoid conflicts in future releases.
  * Custom columns SHOULD follow the same rules listed above for FOCUS columns.

>   * Custom columns MUST be documented, including description, purpose, and relationship to [*native dataset*](#glossary:native-dataset) columns.

Reviewer: Push back if you think I'm going too far -- but I want to make sure the data generator understand the "publicly-available" part.  This stuff can't be paywalled or otherwise obfuscated.

```suggestion
  * Custom columns MUST be detailed in publicly-available documentation, including description, purpose, and relationship to [*native dataset*](#glossary:native-dataset) columns.
```

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Added "publicly-available" to the documentation requirement. Line 46 now reads:

> Custom columns MUST be detailed in publicly-available documentation, including description, purpose, and relationship to native dataset columns.
